Date: 2013-10-14
Title: EMBL Application
Summary: brief list of the requiered fields


Here I will try to gather all the necessary information about the application process to EMBL PhD interviews.

The deadline is on 11.11.13

[TOC]

* General Info
* Education
* Documents
* Coursework

## Research Experience
Write the title and a description of your Diploma (thesis) research, or equivalent. Indicate the significance, the aims and your contributions and, in all cases, state the number of months of research involved. If you carried out other research prior to your Diploma, or since then, please describe it briefly in a separate paragraph. List publications, if any (minimum 500 and maximum 2000 characters).

## Scientific Interests
Please write a personal statement about your scientific interests.To make your point, you may mention specific EMBL group leaders who you would be interested in working with (these may include groups that are outside of the units you have chosen on the 'programme preference' page). Please explain clearly why you would like to work in these areas of research. Please note that this part of the application serves two purposes: It allows us to find out what your scientific interests are, and it gives you the possibility to highlight group leaders whose work you are particularly interested in, including some who might not be part of the two units you selected.(minimum 500 and maximum 2000 characters)\


Much of my interests I have found in common with the work recently developed in the group of Dr. Lars Hufnagel. I am interested in the processes in which biological structures take shape. Given the recent development of tools (both hardware and software), it is now possible to observe different scales of development at the same time: the biological structure as a whole, together with each of its individual entities, the cells. As well, both resolution in time and space is achieved. 

The emerging structures during development result from the integration of both signaling pathways and biomechanical forces which contribute by modulating cell behaviors as differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis. I am interested in new technologies that will allow for the  implementation of experimental strategies to measure spatio temporal patterns in gene expression, as well, image processing techniques that will allow to estimate local variations in biomechanical properties. This is very interesting since we could then acquire quantitative spatio-temporal data for both the biophysical and the genetic components of ontogeny. These types of measurements can be later employed for link the contribution of each component to shape determination. 

As quantitative approaches become essential for the description of morphogenesis, another topic I am interested is the combination of these type of data with mathematical and computational approaches. A tight integration of both will allow us to test and distinguish between various explanatory hypotheses and thus understanding the design principles of morphology in nature.


Much of this 



localization of signaling molecules explanatory hypotesis

 

 which as quantitative data is available allow us to distinguis between posible models. 




* MApping of genotype-phenotype
* Cell-to-cell variability
* Quantitative approaches in microscopy
* 
*


## Scientific Reading

Which of the scientific publications you read lately impressed you most and why?Literature (author(s), title, journal, abstract, maximum 2000 characters) 

Schwank, G. et al. (Clevers, H.) PLoS ONE (2013). Generation of BAC Transgenic Epithelial Organoids
They propose a method for the generation of recombinant "organoids", a self-organizing compartmentalized three-dimensional tissue structure. Here, liposome-based transfection with entire fluorescently tagged genes is demonstrated. The article presents a fast and practical method for the generation of recombinant ex-vivo cultures to be readily available for imaging and functional analysis, enabling for rapid exploration of a "modular representation" of organogenesis.

Raj, A. et al. (van Oudenaarden, A.) Nature (2010). Variability in gene expression underlies incomplete penetrance
Here they show that phenotypic differences in multicellular organisms is linked to the variability in gene expression of a small set of genes in a regulatory network. They found one example of a mechanism buffering random variability during development, thus explaining the incomplete penetrance in compromised individuals.

Crombach, A. et al. (Jaeger, J.) PLoS computational biology (2012). Efficient reverse-engineering of a developmental gene regulatory network.
The use of a reverse-engineering approach to modelling gene-regulatory networks in development is discussed. Their method is tightly linked to the use of spatio-temporal quantitative measurements of mRNA and protein levels important for patterning Drosophila. They demonstrate the dispensability of post-transcriptional regulation for patterning while emphasizing the necessity of rigorous identifiability analysis.

Ahrens, M. B. et al. (Keller, P. J.) Nature Methods (2013). Whole-brain functional imaging at cellular resolution using light-sheet microscopy.
Single cell resolution imaging is achieved on the time-scale of a second allowing for the functional analysis of the neuronal connections within the whole brain. This led to the identification of correlated oscillatory activity between two brain regions.


Please write a personal statement about your scientific reading habits. Please focus on the reasons why you were impressed by the scientific publication you cited above. To further illustrate your scientific interests it would be valuable to also explain how you go about the choice of literature you read. (minimum 500 characters and maximum 2000 characters)

Above, I cited various publications because they are only impressive when considered together. There is a clear or subtle connection between them in the context of development. The first article shows an experimental system with a lot of potential for understanding the role of adult stem cells in tissue regeneration and morphogenesis; the possibility of readily generating transfected tissue would allow for further functional imaging as described in the second cited work. Such imaging technologies allow for the acquisition of highly resolved quantitative data which can be used to feed models in a fashion described in the third cited work. The fourth article is important when trying to study the ontogenic genotype-phenotype map; it remarks the role of played by noise in metazoan development and provides a mechanistic description of the regulatory-network responsible for the canalization of cell-fate determinants. 

I read mostly to build myself a picture of the kind of science I want to pursue in the future, in this sense I collect articles about methods, experimental systems and theoretical approaches that somehow find their shape together in my mind. Regarding my reading habits, I don't have a precise or systematic way, I can spend some weeks without finding anything appealing to read while there are seasons where I read a lot about one thing and its related topics. 

For example, in this case Light sheet microscopy would allow to get single-cell quantitative measurements of fluorescent markers in an ex-vivo self-organizing system in which cell to cell heterogenity has an quantitative impact on morphogenesis. 

Eventhough most of my reading is based on the projects I am angaged at the moment other great deal of it 

I shoose articles in three manners, first, I have my favorite research groups/ authors, ii) I google for reviews on a new topic and from there I follow references.  


## Honours

List any honours or awards that you feel are relevant to this application.Include dates and a short description (maximum 500 characters).

## Outside interests

List your outside interests that are not directly related to your university degree (maximum 500 characters).

## Research Units

From the description of the research activities of the various faculty members in the scientific fields represented at EMBL, please indicate at most 2 scientific fields in which you may like to do your thesis research. Only the selected units will evaluate your application. You may be invited for interview by only one of the chosen units.

Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit- MMPUwill be recruiting candidates out of the Genome Biology, Cell Biology and Biophysics, Structural and Computational Biology Units and Mouse Biology Programme.
Please choose the unit according to the unit affiliation of the EMBL Group Leader

## Research Topics

Identifying your own true research interests for becoming a PhD student is a crucial step towards your future life as a scientist. When applying for the EMBL International PhD Programme you select the two research units you are most interested in on the 'programme preference' page.

In addition, we are asking you to select a maximum of four (min. of two) of the research topics listed here that you are most interested in. This may result in additional invitations for interviews with group leaders from units other than the two units you have chosen but that are also working in the area of interest you have indicated.

The Graduate Office will not be able to provide you with any further information about possible interviews, these will only be determined once applicants are selected for interview.

* Gene regulation, Transcription, Chromatin and Epigenetics
* Cell Signalling and Cell Differentiation
* Cellular Organisation and Dynamics (nucleus, cytoskeleton, membranes, intracellular trafficking ); Cell division
* Chemistry & Chemical Biology
* Computational Genomics (Genome analysis and annotation) Metagenomics
* Computational Modelling of Biological Systems and Processes
* Disease Mechanisms and Models, Pathogens, Molecular Medicine,Drug Design, Stem Cells
* Evolution
* Functional Genomics, Genetics, Gene Networks
* Imaging & Image Analysis
* Macromolecular Complexes, Interaction Networks
* Neurobiology (from brain development to physiology and behavior)
* Physics & Biophysics
* Plant biology
* Proteomics
* RNA metabolism, transport and processing, ncRNAs and miRNAs
* Robotics & Automation, Engineering
* Software Development and Bioinformatics (incl. Text Mining,Semantic Web, Machine Learning, Statistics)
* Tissue Morphogenesis, Cell Polarity and Migration
* X-ray Crystallography, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance, Electron Microscopy

## References

List the name, address and email of at least 2 and up to 3 referees who will write a letter of recommendation on your behalf.
An email will be sent to them as soon as you have saved this page and they must submit their letter using the online application system.
Please make sure to contact your referees before completing this part in order to find out if they are available and willing to provide a reference.
We strongly recommend to complete the list of referees as early as possible giving them enough time to complete your reference online.
It is your responsibility to ensure that references reach us on time.
Please note that only letters of reference submitted from an institutional e-mail address will be considered. References from private e-mail accounts i.e. hotmail, yahoo etc. will not be considered. For referees that only have a private e-mail account, please follow the procedure as set out here.

Important: PLEASE MAKE SURE THAT EMAIL ADDRESSES ARE CORRECT
The reference letters must be received before 2013/11/20, at 23:59 Central European Time (GMT +1 hour)
