Title: Research Interests and Experience
Date: 2013-11-05
Category: personal
Tags: EMBL

* **Research Experience.** Write the title and a description of your Diploma (thesis) research, or equivalent. Indicate the significance, the aims and your contributions and, in all cases, state the number of months of research involved. If you carried out other research prior to your Diploma, or since then, please describe it briefly in a separate paragraph. List publications, if any (minimum 500 and maximum 2000 characters).

* **Scientific Interests.** Please write a personal statement about your scientific interests.To make your point, you may mention specific EMBL group leaders who you would be interested in working with (these may include groups that are outside of the units you have chosen on the 'programme preference' page). Please explain clearly why you would like to work in these areas of research. Please note that this part of the application serves two purposes: It allows us to find out what your scientific interests are, and it gives you the possibility to highlight group leaders whose work you are particularly interested in, including some who might not be part of the two units you selected.(minimum 500 and maximum 2000 characters)

---
## cv

- Research Internship at the Center for Interdisciplinary Scientific Computing. Multidimensional Image Processing: Group of Prof. Fred A. Hamprecht. 
Project title: “Cell tracking of mouse gut organoids“. 
Heidelberg, Germany.
May to June 2013.

- Research Internship at the Hubrecht Institute. Quantitative biology of development & stem cells: Group of Prof. Alexander van Oudenaarden. 
Project title: “Insights into chromatin organization during interphase: combinatorial high-resolution DNA FISH and image processing“.
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
September 2012 – March 2013.

- Master in Molecular Biosciences, major in Systems Biology. University of Heidelberg.
Heidelberg, Baden-Württemberg. Germany.
October 2011 to date.

- Research Internship for Bachelor Thesis, National Laboratory of Genomics for Biodiversity; CINVESTAV. Genetic Systems Biology Lab. under the supervision of Dr. Alexander DeLuna. 
Thesis title: “Describing gene-environment interactions and beneficial effects of mutations in yeast metabolism using a novel automated high-resolution fitness profiling system”. 
Irapuato, Guanajuato. Mexico.
August 2009 – January 2011.

- Bachelor in Genomic Sciences (Cum Laude), National Autonomous University of Mexico
(UNAM). Center for Genomic Sciences; GPA 9.34 / (min. 6 and max.10)
Cuernavaca, Morelos. Mexico.
2006 - 2010.




## Research Experience

My research experience hasn't been limited to a single project; luckily, throughout my carrer --both Bachelor and now Master-- I have had the opportunity to occupy myself with different topics and interact with various research groups. First at the National Laboratory of Genomics for Biodiversity in Mexico at the Genetics Systems Lab, group headed by Dr. Alexander de Luna. Secondly at the Hubrecht Institute in Utrecht in the group of Prof. Alexander van Oudenaarden, and lastly at two groups at the University of Heidelberg, one at the Institute for Interdisciplinary Computing in the group of Prof. Fred Hamprecht, and a second one, currently working on my Master thesis at Bioquant in the group of Dr. Niels Grabe. 

BACHELOR: Firstly I explored gene-environment interactions using the yeast metabolism as a genetic-system model. Using the concept of epistatic genetic-interactions (i.e. the combined effect of two gene KO's is synergistic or antagonistic rather than additive) I explored the link between gene and environment for all metabolic single knockouts in yeast (~ 480). To this end, I experimentally measured the impact in growth fitness phenotypes after the mentioned perturbations. I found that around 45% and 35%  of the essayed gene-knockouts had either a neutral or detrimental phenotype in comparison to the wild type in the same condition, while around 20%  have an enhanced fitness phenotype in at least one environmental perturbation. The latter observation unravels some of the evolutionary design principles of biological systems; the high number of knockouts which upon environmental remain neutral or acquire an advantage indicates a mechanism for exploring a genotype space. Consider, for instance a latent fraction of a population bearing a neutral mutation in X condition for which growth phenotype is enhanced by an abrupt environmental change to Y condition. The latent population fraction may be later positively selected under a detrimental environment for the native phenotype. While this oservations were not new, the exact distribution of the gene-environment interaction effects on fitness weren't previously systematically addressed. The development of this work took 11 months in the frame of my Bachelor thesis. My contributions to this project were varied, from the experimental setup, to software develpment and data analysis. Experimentally, this project involved genetic manipulation of two collections of yeast knockout mutants which were generated (~900, being ~480 with a respetive replicate) by means of Synthetic Genetic Array methodologies. As well, the selection and validation of consititive fluorescent markers was performed such that competition growth dinamics of mutant vs witld-type could be monitored in co-culture. Moreover, there was room for technology development, and a software platform was designed (in Python) to control a commercial robotic system (TECAN Freedom Evo 200); this allowed for the parallel automated measurments of fitness. Later, the quantitative and statistical analysis of the data was performed in MATLAB. All together, the achieved goal was the development of a platform to quantify the relative fitness of around 1300 competition assays in parallel. Finally we were able to carry out, collect and integrate data generated from more than 6000 competition assays.

Later, during the first National Synthetic Biology Summer Workshop which took place in the Center for Research and Advanced Studies of the National Polytechnic Institute in Mexico. Along with my team, we designed a synthetic regulatory switch that supports memory by means of epigenetic modifications. The system involved two competing site-directed chromatin modifying factors with binding sites at opposing sites of a set of fluorescent reporters. Although the summer did not suffice to put together the experimental handcraft, I participated in the experimental design and in the use of Agent Based-modelling framework to simulate the dynamics of the synthetic device.

After the completion of my bachelor I got temporary hired in a spin-off company founded by one of my professors at the university (Winter Genomics). In this just-started company my task was mainly to assess the usability of R packages in the tasks the company was focused on. During this short stay  (around 1 month) I reviewed and documented two packages, one for Genome Wide Association Studies and another, a dataframe schema for the representation of next-generation sequencing data. Despite my stay was very short, I used this time to refresh my knowledge of R and I also learned how to use very handy programs for collaborative projects and revision systems such as Git/Github.

MASTER: The Master program compraises one year of coursework, two lab rotations and the Master thesis internship. During my first lab rotation at the Hubrecht Institute (6 months), I participated in a project to precisely localize fluorescently labeled chromatin regions within the nucleus. There, around 80 fluoresently labeled probes (~200 nt long) were designed to bind a specific chromatin region. By preserving the three-dimensional structure of the nucleus, multiple chromatin regions can be then localized by using different fluorofore combinations; subsequently their distances to each other can be measured. This project required the implementation of a pipeline to precisely localize the small regions using image processing of volumetric microscopy images. To this end, despite the use of apochromatic lenses, a non-linear chromatic aberration had to be corrected, and the different channels had to be registered. As a result, I designed and integrated all the measuring and analysis pocedures into a MATLAB Graphical User Interface which is currently used to analyise experiments. During this internship, I also collaborated in the experimental part of a side-project involving single molecule RNA-fish quantification in tissue sections. Here, culture expansion of primary tissue was cryo-sectioned, stained, hybridized, imaged, and quiantified for stem cell markers upon different growth-factor treatments.

Back in Heidelberg, during the last lab rotation at the Center for interdisciplinary computing in the group of Prof. Hamprecht (6 weeks), I worked in collaboration with the group of Prof. Hans Clevers in Utrecht. They expanded and imaged mouse-gut stem-cells which upon expansion, self-organize into a three-dimensional structure. I was interested in capturing key aspects of stem-cell biology in self organization. My objective was the spatio-temporal tracking of these biological structures. This required to install, test, and fine-tune the segmentation and tracking software _Ilastik_. Furthermore I configured the software given the specific characteristics of my dataset. After repeatedly performing training and segmentation, a good agreement with the visual inspection was reached and the tracking was carried-out. Here I also contributed minimally to the software development by designing a tunable function to penalize appereances and dissapeareances of cells within the field-of-view according to their distances to the margins. This function was integrated into Ilastik graphical user interface. The C++ implementation of the new penalty regime for dis/appearances reduced the number of actual nuclei being assigned as misidentifications, which also improved the tracking capabilities for this specific dataset. At the end I wasn't able to reach good tracking result given the low depth resolution of the volumetric image, which happered the segmentation and thus the tracking. Finally a more advanced micriscope setup was suggested.

Currently at Bioquant, I am working on the building of a mathematical model to capture the influence of the microenvironment on the density of immune cell infiltrates in metastases. The extent of infiltration has been observed to correlate with the response to treatment for both primary tumor and metastases. The variability of these infiltrates among patients is influenced by paracrine and autocrine cytokine communications between different cell types in which the appropriate response is modulated by the malignant cells allowing them to grow. The model aims to integrate a continuous representation of cytokines/chemokines with a descrete representations of different celltypes organized in tissue compartments. As the immune response is a complex process involving different elements interacting within a spatial context and they responses vary given their identity and immidiate nighborhood, these particular characteristics are suitable to be approached as discrete entities. Agent based models allow us to incorporate different aspects of the immune system that could give rise to emergent behaviors explaining the variability oberved in the density of immune cell infiltrates in patients. So far I am in the model building phase for which I am integrating information from cytokine concentrations measured form a cohort of around 50 patients in four diferent tumor microenvironment compartments. This information will allow us to translate the cytokine relationships into behavioral rules for a cell based modelling apporach to the tumor microenvironment.

In my bachelor research project I used the yeast metabolism as a model to try to understand the interactions between genetic and environmental components underlying an advantageous gene knock-out (a knock-out that enhances fitness in certain condition). During the development of this project I became fascinated by the relationship of genotype-phenotype. This complex relationship, which is influenced by both, genetic interactions and gene-environment interactions, allowed me to dive into a new series of concepts like plasticity --how a biological system responds to environmental change-- and evolvability --the feasibility of a phenotypic change in response to mutation--. It has been observed that mutations often have consequences that vary across individuals. Moreover, current research indicates that environmental stimulation of a stress response can reduce mutation penetrance in C. elegans (Casanueva et al., 2012) , Casanueva et al. experimentally observed that the induced mutation buffering varies across genetically identical individuals because of individual differences in stress signaling, indicating that this flexibility in signal transduction can induce protection against mutations, which might be facilitating further adaptation (Espinosa-Soto et al., 
2 2011). 

Now I am doing a lab rotation at the van Oudenaarden Lab, at the Hubrecht Institute in Utrecht, NL. These last months I've been mostly into image processing: tissue segmentation and feature quantification; in the lab I am working now, they have developed a very quantitative methodology to count single mRNA molecules using microscopy. They are using this technique to assess the expression of genes tightly regulating development, or the variability of these in a single cell basis. 

Lately I've discovered that the development of multicellular organisms is a truly plastic process and is also well suited for a systems biology approach (as the robust formation of magnificent patterns has always wondered scientists, I am no exception). I think that it is the modelling of the cell's inner circuitry in combination with topological cues (structure, population context, etc.) what makes of the multi-scale modelling paradigm a very suitable framework to study the plasticity development. I would like to learn a handful of tools addressed to this kind of modelling, it doesn't have to be directly linked to development in this case. 





## Scientific Interests

Phenotypic features constraining/directing evolutionary trajectories of genes. Evolutionary trajectories of genes depend on their mutations and the distribution of the associated fitness effect.in order to find genotypes with improved phenotypes, or phenotype that match the required environmental demands, the genetic capacitors can be seen as the genes responsible for the canalization of a phenotype, so that they are the key element in a genotype network. ando how a canalization property is mapped into the fitness landscape. does this canals or atractors in the phenotype map, respectively map to peaks in the fitness landcape? As environmental capacitors, we have observed that chaperones play an important role, and also very important that they are buffering genetic perturbations, We observe one interaction between two genes, this interaction can either be neutral, aggravating or beneficial. We would also expect the appearance of one expression phenotype combined with one loss-of-function phenotype and expect the same three resulting scenarios? We say we might be helping the organism to optimize its fitness by previously deleting one gene, then exposing it to the environmental change will increase its chance to survive relative to the native genotype. The ontogenic process leading to differential mutation penetrance, or differential phenotype MM Canalization is the reduction in sensitivity of a phenotype to perturbation, either genetic or environmental. MM Phenocopy is a variant that is produced in response to environmental perturbation and that mimics a variant phenotype that can be produced by mutation
In my bachelor research project I used the yeast metabolism as a model to try to understand the interactions between genetic and environmental components underlying an advantageous gene knock-out (a knock-out that enhances fitness in certain condition). During the development of this project I became fascinated by the relationship of genotype-phenotype. This complex relationship, which is influenced by both, genetic interactions and gene-environment interactions, allowed me to dive into a new series of concepts like plasticity –how a biological system responds to environmental change– and evolvability –the feasibility of a phenotypic change in response to mutation–. It has been observed that mutations often have consequences that vary across individuals. Moreover, current research indicates that environmental stimulation of a stress response can reduce mutation penetrance in Caenorhabditis elegans (Casanueva et al., 2012)

Fitness Trade-Offs and Environmentally Induced Mutation Buffering in Isogenic C. elegans M. Olivia Casanueva, Alejandro Burga, and Ben Lehner. Science, 6 January 2012: 335 (6064), 82-85, Casanueva et al. experimentally observed that the induced mutation buffering varies across genetically identical individuals because of individual differences in stress signaling, indicating that this flexibility in signal transduction can induce protection against mutations, which might be facilitating further adaptation (Espinosa-Soto et al., 2011)Phenotypic plasticity can facilitate adaptive evolution in gene regulatory circuits Carlos Espinosa-Soto, Olivier Mertin and Andreas Wagner. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 6 January 2011, 11:5 . 

All this concepts together, constitute the basic context of my current interest. Now, during the Master program in Systems Biology in the University of Heidelberg I aim to study whether the combinatorial effect within a signaling pathway plays a role mechanistically explaining how environmental responses can underlie variable mutation buffering, and how this plasticity makes variation in stress signaling advantageous. To do this, recently developed frameworks like the rule based modeling-language Kappa, offers a suitable approach. 


