Title: EMBL scrambled

BACHELOR: Firstly I explored synergistic interactions between gene and environment for all metabolic single knockouts in yeast (~ 480). To this end, I experimentally measured the impact in growth fitness phenotypes after environmental perturbation. I observed around 20% having an enhanced fitness in at least one condition. My contributions to this project were varied, from the experimental setup, to software develpment and data analysis. Experimentally, it involved the generation of 900 different mutants. As well, selection and validation of consititive fluorescent markers such that the growth competition could be monitored in co-culture. Moreover, a software platform was designed (in Python) to control a commercial robotic system (TECAN Freedom Evo 200); which allowed for the parallel automated measurments of fitness. Later, the quantitative and statistical analysis of the data was performed in MATLAB. All together, the achieved goal was the development of a platform to quantify the relative fitness of around 1300 competition assays in parallel. Finally we were able to carry out, collect and integrate data generated from more than 6000 competition assays.

MASTER: The Master program compraises one year of coursework, two lab rotations and the Master thesis internship. During my first lab rotation at the Hubrecht Institute (6 months), I participated in a project to precisely localize fluorescently labeled chromatin regions within the nucleus. There, around 80 fluoresently labeled probes (~200 nt long) were designed to bind a specific chromatin region. By preserving the three-dimensional structure of the nucleus, multiple chromatin regions can be then localized by using different fluorofore combinations; subsequently their distances to each other can be measured. This project required the implementation of a pipeline to precisely localize the small regions using image processing of volumetric microscopy images. To this end, despite the use of apochromatic lenses, a non-linear chromatic aberration had to be corrected, and the different channels had to be registered. As a result, I designed and integrated all the measuring and analysis pocedures into a MATLAB Graphical User Interface which is currently used to analyise experiments. During this internship, I also collaborated in the experimental part of a side-project involving single molecule RNA-fish quantification in tissue sections. Here, culture expansion of primary tissue was cryo-sectioned, stained, hybridized, imaged, and quiantified for stem cell markers upon different growth-factor treatments.
====

Synergistic gene-environment interactions: single knockouts of yeast metabolic genes were assessed for growth in different environmental conditions. Using constitutively expressed fluorescent reporters around 6000 competition assays in co-culture were monitored. A software platform was designed (in Python) to control a commercial robotic system (TECAN); this allowed for the parallel automated measurements of fitness. Statistical analysis was done in MATLAB.(11 months)

Chromatin conformation analysis with High-definition DNA-FISH: Volumetric microscopy images were analyzed to uncover single-cell chromatin structure. A workflow for precise localization of diffraction-limited fluorescent spots was integrated in a MATLAB toolbox.(6 months)

Single cell tracking of the Organoid: a 3D, self-organized structure expanded from a single adult-stem-cell of the mouse small intestine was analysed using a segmentation/tracking tool (ILASTIK). Implementation in Python and C++ of two new features was carried-out.(6 weeks)

Agent-based modelling of the tumor microenvironment: The variability of immune-cell infiltrates among patients is influenced by paracrine and autocrine cytokine communications between different cell types in which the appropriate response is modulated by the malignant cells allowing them to grow. The model aims to integrate a continuous representation of cytokines/chemokines with a discrete representations of different cell-types organized in tissue compartments. As the immune response is a complex process involving different elements interacting within a spatial context and their responses vary given their identity and immediate neighborhood, these particular characteristics are suitable to be approached as discrete entities. Agent based models allow us to incorporate different aspects of the immune system that could give rise to emergent behaviors explaining the variability observed in the density of immune cell infiltrates in patients.(6 months)
=========

Back in Heidelberg, during the last lab rotation at the Center for interdisciplinary computing in the group of Prof. Hamprecht (6 weeks), I worked in collaboration with the group of Prof. Hans Clevers in Utrecht. They expanded and imaged mouse-gut stem-cells which upon expansion, self-organize into a three-dimensional structure. I was interested in capturing key aspects of stem-cell biology in self organization. My objective was the spatio-temporal tracking of these biological structures. This required to install, test, and fine-tune the segmentation and tracking software _Ilastik_. Furthermore I configured the software given the specific characteristics of my dataset. After repeatedly performing training and segmentation, a good agreement with the visual inspection was reached and the tracking was carried-out. Here I also contributed minimally to the software development by designing a tunable function to penalize appereances and dissapeareances of cells within the field-of-view according to their distances to the margins. This function was integrated into Ilastik graphical user interface. The C++ implementation of the new penalty regime for dis/appearances reduced the number of actual nuclei being assigned as misidentifications, which also improved the tracking capabilities for this specific dataset. At the end I wasn't able to reach good tracking result given the low depth resolution of the volumetric image, which happered the segmentation and thus the tracking. Finally a more advanced micriscope setup was suggested.

Currently at Bioquant, I am working on the building of a mathematical model to capture the influence of the microenvironment on the density of immune cell infiltrates in metastases. The extent of infiltration has been observed to correlate with the response to treatment for both primary tumor and metastases. The variability of these infiltrates among patients is influenced by paracrine and autocrine cytokine communications between different cell types in which the appropriate response is modulated by the malignant cells allowing them to grow. The model aims to integrate a continuous representation of cytokines/chemokines with a descrete representations of different celltypes organized in tissue compartments. As the immune response is a complex process involving different elements interacting within a spatial context and they responses vary given their identity and immidiate nighborhood, these particular characteristics are suitable to be approached as discrete entities. Agent based models allow us to incorporate different aspects of the immune system that could give rise to emergent behaviors explaining the variability oberved in the density of immune cell infiltrates in patients. So far I am in the model building phase for which I am integrating information from cytokine concentrations measured form a cohort of around 50 patients in four diferent tumor microenvironment compartments. This information will allow us to translate the cytokine relationships into behavioral rules for a cell based modelling apporach to the tumor microenvironment.